Response requirements (#33)
rahelFain/combined-diem-uses-reqs: draft-ietf-diem-requirements.md

Digital emblems MUST specify how validators can check for the presence of a digital emblem. That is, given an asset a validator must be able to determine whether it has an associated emblem. For example, verifying whether a FQDN has an emblem associated with it could be realized by fetching digital emblem-associated records for said FQDN.

### Query Response {#response-reqs}

Specifications for each use case MUST each determine how responses to queries for Digital Emblems of their specified type are handled.

> Specifically, they must determine the responsiveness and consistency requirements for emblems of their given type and provide explanations of how the chosen requirements apply and rationales for their selection.

Reviewer: You first say that we must specify how responses are handled, but line 205 then comments on sending behavior. "Responsiveness and consistency" are about the sender, not the receiver.

Author: OK I see how my phrasing (`how responses to queries...are handled`) made it sound like I was initially talking about the recipient. My intent was for both sentences to center on the sender and I will update the phrasing accordingly. Here's how I plan to rephrase it.
 `Specifications for each use case MUST each determine how servers must respond to queries for Digital Emblems of their specified type.
 Specifically , they must determine the responsiveness and consistency requirements for emblems of their given type and provide explanations of how the chosen requirements apply and rationales for their selection.`

For responsiveness, an instance of a specific type of digital emblem can either be required to respond to all queries for it (Assured Response), or allowed to selectively respond to a specific subset of incoming queries (Selective Response).

> For consistency of response  specifications for a given type of digital emblem must denote whether consistent content is required for all responses provided (Consistent Content) or whether the contents of a response may vary based on specific requester attributes (Selective Content).

Reviewer: I think this phrasing is hard to map to our current list of requirements/use cases. It is underspecified what a "request" is. Without defining that, you also cannot define consistency. Maybe, it would be easier to define consistency not w.r.t. to requests, but to assets? One could meaningfully say that "checking the emblem for asset X always results in the same emblems."

It also seems easier to me whether emblems should (or not) be publicly accessible.

Author: A lot of the unusual phrasing is due to the fact that digital emblems will be deployed via DNS.
DNS allows the deployment of multiple authoritative name servers across different geographical locations, and for them to point to different hosting or site servers. Additionally, an authoritative name server can employ specific logic to determine with which if any resolution response it replies to an incoming query.

Why not state "whether emblems should (or not) be publicly accessible"?
The phrasing you suggested does not account for the full range of ways an authoritative name server (or set of servers) could handle a search for emblem X. 
An example of an allowed behavior that wouldn't be accounted for: 
- responses can vary based on the geographic origin of the request: This could mean everyone who searches for emblem E in country/region X gets response A, whereas everyone who searches for the same emblem X in country Y (or simply outside of country/region X) gets response B. In that case both responses A and B could be said to be publicly accessible, but not necessarily consistent.

Reviewer: I don't find the phrasing "unusual," I find it unclear. For "selective content," your suggestion of "publicly accessible" could work.

The rest I still find unclear. For example, what is an "emblem instance" and why would you query it? Are we querying emblems actively or are we querying for emblems bound to an identifier? I would assume the latter. Anyway, I think my suggestion would address different responses based on geography. I don't see what geography adds. Responses are the same or not, no?

While some use cases may be able to allow selective response and/or selective content, assured response and consistent

> content are  prerequisites for proof of presence.

Reviewer: This is a technical nit, but I disagree that consistency is required for proof of presence. As a strawman example, let's say that we use a public log to mark assets (Merkle hash tree style construction). For level 1, you could prove that an emblem was verifiable by referring to a public root hash and showing the correct proofs of inclusion (let's assume it is public information that the root hash was public at the relevant point in time). But it could be that there are multiple emblems in the log, and you may be allowed to show different emblems to different parties. Each emblem was verifiable, but parties may have had an inconsistent view of an assets emblems.

Author: This may be a case where the specific phrasing of the requirement needs to shift to something more like proof of presence and visibility or proof of presence and accessibility. 
The basic premise is that anyone who checked for the emblem of asset S at point in time T should get the same emblem or response. That way, in the event of an alleged violation of the rules/standards/regulations denoted by a digital emblem there would be no doubt that had anyone checked the affected asset for an emblem before engaging, they would have seen it.

Why I had phrased it as the same response:
Part of what I have found tricky about the phrasing is that we have not defined which attributes of a response need to remain consistent for them to be considered the same digital emblem - since that is a discussion for the architecture. My instinct was to say that the responses served/fields controlled by the authoritative name server need to be identical to try and limit confusion. 
With that said, I can see how leaving the phrasing more flexible by simply saying they should be the same emblem - and waiting to define exactly what that means for now may be more appropriate.

Reviewer 2: Thank you for this PR. I think the response-requirements discussion is important, especially for use cases where visibility is part of the protective function of the emblem or protected-status marking.

One possible way to clarify the issue may be to distinguish response layers:

1. discovery/existence of DIEM data for an asset;
2. a minimal profile or category hint;
3. a reference, digest, or locator for the full DIEM object;
4. the full signed emblem or protected-status object;
5. proof-of-presence or audit evidence, if required by the specific use case.

Under this model, a profile could require consistent discovery of the existence of DIEM data for asset X, while still allowing selective or variable full content depending on requester attributes, geography, authorization, access policy, or operational context.

For example, a minimal DNS/DIEM response could indicate only that DIEM data exists and that validation should be triggered:

```dns
_diem.hospital.example. IN DIEM "v=1; presence=1; profile=ihl-medical-humanitarian; digest=sha256-abc123; ref=https://diem-authority.example/records/abc123"
```

This would not be the full emblem object. It would only tell a DIEM-aware client:

```text
DIEM data exists for this asset.
The profile is medical/humanitarian.
Validation should be triggered.
The full signed object can be located or verified using the reference/digest.
```

A different IHL-related profile could use the same discovery pattern without reusing humanitarian or medical emblem semantics. For example, cultural property:

```dns
_diem.museum.example. IN DIEM "v=1; presence=1; profile=ihl-cultural-property; digest=sha256-def456; ref=https://diem-authority.example/records/def456"
```

In that case, the full signed object could provide the profile-specific semantics:

```json
{
  "version": "DIEM1",
  "asset": {
    "id": "museum.example",
    "type": "fqdn"
  },
  "profile": {
    "id": "ihl-cultural-property",
    "family": "ihl"
  },
  "marking": {
    "kind": "protected-status",
    "physical_equivalent": "blue-shield"
  },
  "issuer": {
    "id": "cultural-authority.example"
  },
  "validity": {
    "not_before": "2026-01-01T00:00:00Z",
    "not_after": "2027-01-01T00:00:00Z"
  },
  "revocation": {
    "status": "valid",
    "uri": "https://diem-authority.example/status/def456"
  },
  "signature": "base64url-signature"
}
```

For an installation containing dangerous forces, the discovery response could remain minimal, while the full content may need to be selective or minimized:

```dns
_diem.dam.example. IN DIEM "v=1; presence=1; profile=ihl-dangerous-forces-installation; digest=sha256-ghi789; ref=https://diem-authority.example/records/ghi789"
```

The full object might identify the protected-status profile without exposing unnecessary technical details:

```json
{
  "version": "DIEM1",
  "asset": {
    "id": "dam.example",
    "type": "fqdn"
  },
  "profile": {
    "id": "ihl-dangerous-forces-installation",
    "family": "ihl"
  },
  "marking": {
    "kind": "protected-status",
    "physical_equivalent": "three-bright-orange-circles",
    "asset_category": "dam"
  },
  "issuer": {
    "id": "authorized-infrastructure-authority.example"
  },
  "validation": {
    "digest": "sha256-ghi789",
    "revocation_uri": "https://diem-authority.example/status/ghi789"
  },
  "signature": "base64url-signature"
}
```

For a civilian essential service that may not correspond to an existing physical emblem, the profile could avoid claiming humanitarian or medical emblem semantics:

```dns
_diem.water.example. IN DIEM "v=1; presence=1; profile=ihl-civilian-essential-service; sector=water; digest=sha256-jkl012; ref=https://diem-authority.example/records/jkl012"
```

The full object could make the distinction explicit:

```json
{
  "version": "DIEM1",
  "asset": {
    "id": "water.example",
    "type": "fqdn"
  },
  "profile": {
    "id": "ihl-civilian-essential-service",
    "family": "ihl",
    "sector": "water"
  },
  "marking": {
    "kind": "protected-status",
    "physical_equivalent": null,
    "not_humanitarian_emblem": true
  },
  "issuer": {
    "id": "civilian-infrastructure-authority.example"
  },
  "validation": {
    "digest": "sha256-jkl012",
    "revocation_uri": "https://diem-authority.example/status/jkl012"
  },
  "signature": "base64url-signature"
}
```

These examples are not proposed syntax. They are only intended to illustrate the distinction between:

- a minimal discovery/existence response;
- a profile/category hint;
- a reference or digest for validation;
- and the full signed object with profile-specific semantics.

This distinction may help separate two different questions:

- “Can a DIEM-aware client discover that DIEM data exists for this asset?”
- “Does every requester receive the same full emblem or protected-status object?”

For some profiles, consistent discoverability of DIEM data for asset X may be important because visibility is part of the protective function. However, the full content may still be selective, minimized, or profile-dependent.

In short, perhaps the draft could distinguish between:

- consistent discoverability of DIEM data for an asset;
- consistency or selectivity of the full emblem/protected-status content;
- and proof-of-presence or audit evidence, where required by the use case.

This might preserve the visibility function of certain emblems or protected-status markings while still allowing DNS-based deployments to support selective responses or selective content where a use case requires it.

Author: @wnunezc These are all great suggestions, but I would argue that the specifics of what is the minimum content or representation of an emblem is a question that should be addressed in the architecture document rather than here. 
@felixlinker If there are multiple distinct Digital Emblems for a given asset (as will likely be denoted by a set keyword based domain name) they both need to be returned if consistent content is required. If two emblems are of the same type and ostensibly cover the same information/indicate the same protections/etc. it is likely that these are simply two versions of the same digital emblem.  To that end, I will be adding text stating that the exact definition for what constitutes a Digital Emblem (as well as a distinct one) will be defined in the architecture document.

Reviewer 2: @rahelFain  @felixlinker 

Small clarification based on the mailing-list discussion:

The DNS snippets in my earlier comment were only illustrative. I am not proposing a `_diem` label, a `DIEM` RRtype, or a separate discovery mechanism.

I would restate my point more narrowly:

A DIEM-aware validator queries the relevant asset name, inspects the returned RRsets or bundle, determines whether the returned data is interpretable as DIEM, validates the relevant signatures or bindings, and then presents a limited technical result.

The distinction I was trying to make is between:

- discovery that DIEM-interpretable data exists for an asset;
- validation of the relevant signatures or bindings;
- whether the full content is consistent or selective;
- and proof or audit evidence, if required by a specific use case, which may belong outside the core DIEM mechanism.

So the point is not to prescribe DNS syntax. The point is to separate discovery, validation, response consistency, selective content, and downstream proof/audit concerns.

### Query Response {#response-reqs}

Specifications for each use case MUST each determine how servers must respond to queries for Digital Emblems of their specified type.
Specifically, they must determine the responsiveness and consistency requirements for emblems of their given type and
provide explanations of how the chosen requirements apply and the rationales for their selection.

For responsiveness, an instance of a specific type of digital emblem can either be required to respond to all queries for it (Assured Response), or allowed to selectively respond to a specific subset of incoming queries (Selective Response).

For consistency of response, specifications for a given type of Digital Emblem T must denote whether all queries for an
asset's records (as denoted by its FQDN) must return all Digital Emblems of type T associated with the
asset (Consistent Content), or whether the inclusion of emblems of type T in a response may vary based on specific requester attributes (Selective Content).

Note that as of this writing the baseline definition for the minimum set of attributes that constitute a unique Digital

> Emblem, and thus must remain consistent to attain Consistent Content has not been defined.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that as of this writing, neither the baseline definition for the minimum set of attributes that constitute a unique Digital
Emblem, nor the attributes needed to attain Consistent Content have been defined.
```

optional suggestion. @rahelFain Please either apply or reject; then merge this PR

For responsiveness, an instance of a specific type of digital emblem can either be required to respond to all queries for it (Assured Response), or allowed to selectively respond to a specific subset of incoming queries (Selective Response).

For consistency of response, specifications for a given type of Digital Emblem T must denote whether all queries for an
asset's records (as denoted by its FQDN) must return all Digital Emblems of type T associated with the
asset (Consistent Content), or whether the inclusion of emblems of type T in a response may vary based on specific requester attributes (Selective Content).

Note that as of this writing the baseline definition for the minimum set of attributes that constitute a unique Digital
Emblem, and thus must remain consistent to attain Consistent Content has not been defined.
Given the limited scope of this document, that definition as well as the mechanism to ensure its extensibility across
newly defined emblem types will be outlined in the architecture document.

While some use cases may be able to allow selective response and/or selective content, assured response and consistent

> content are  prerequisites for proof of presence.

Reviewer 3: This is super unclear, and it actually has nothing to do with requirements, which are clearly stated above. This sentence is a premature statement about the architecture. I'm going to just delete it. 

```suggestion
```
